Thanks for exploring this Super Summary Plot Summary of “Three Men in a Boat” by Jerome K. Jerome. A modern alternative to SparkNotes and CliffsNotes, Super Summary offers high-quality study guides that feature detailed chapter summaries and analysis of major themes, characters, quotes, and essay topics. Three Men in a Boat by Jerome K. Jerome is about three friends and a dog rowing their way along the Thames toward Oxford. The human characters on the boat are George, Harris, and the author, Jerome. The dog, Montmorency, is a rat terrier. The three young men consider themselves capable outdoorsmen, though they have trouble with simple outdoor survival skills. Setting up a tent flummoxes them. Cooking on a camp stove proves to be too complicated a task. Yet, they enjoy their journey, even though they end up taking a train for the last part of their trip back home from Oxford to London, due to foul weather. They get along relatively well, though they are occasionally at odds with one another.

These disagreements are healed by Jerome’s humour. Their friendship is shown in the way they are willing to not only share a room at an inn, but also sleep three to a bed when necessary.

Along the way, Jerome tells stories about the places they visit. His stories tend in the direction of his own fanciful preferences, which harken back to tales of knights and damsels in distress. He extols, or praises and reveres, chivalry, the code of conduct that once bound the knights of Medieval Europe and England. The book flows much the same way their progress along the Thames progresses--it meanders. Traveling by rowboat, they are not controlled by the wind, so are able to determine their own path.Jerome, known as J in the story, is the narrator. He represents the author and shares many similarities with him at the time of the book’s publication in 1889. He is single, young, and a member of the middle class from London. On occasion, his daydreaming about knights leads him to lose track of steering the boat, which causes some mischief for the three young men and Montmorency. He uses his humour to make fun of his own vanity, as well as that of his friends.

Although the trip was his idea, George does not join the boating trip right away because he works as a bank clerk. George is known for his tendency to sleep late in the mornings. This is ironically displayed when he dozes off while on watch one night. He wakes, thinking he is late for work. After dressing and racing to the bus stop, he realizes that he is not, and is unable to fall asleep again for the remainder of the night. It is at his suggestion they take the train home for the last leg of their journey. On the train, the three men and the dog share a sumptuous meal.

Harris, short for William Samuel Harris, is J’s other friend. Fond of drinking, he always seems to know the best pubs no matter where they end up. One night, after drinking too much, his own imagination takes over, and he believes they are being attacked by swans. Though he has a short temper, Harris also has a good sense of humour, and often tries to perform comic songs--though he usually forgets the words and takes his frustrations out on the pianist.                                              

Three years later, the narrator is a student at the college. He is asked to drive a wealthy white trustee of the college, Mr. Norton, around the campus. Norton talks incessantly about his daughter, then shows an undue interest in the narrative of Jim Trueblood, a poor, uneducated Black man who impregnated his own daughter. After hearing this story, Norton needs a drink, and the narrator takes him to the Golden Day, a saloon and brothel that normally serves Black men. A fight breaks out among a group of mentally imbalanced Black veterans at the bar, and Norton passes out during the chaos. He is tended by one of the veterans, who claims to be a doctor and who taunts both Norton and the narrator for their blindness regarding race relations.

Back at the college, the narrator listens to a long, impassioned sermon by the Reverend Homer A. Barbee on the subject of the college’s Founder, whom the blind Barbee glorifies with poetic language. After the sermon, the narrator is chastised by the college president, Dr. Bledsoe, who has learned of the narrator’s misadventures with Norton at the old slave quarters and the Golden Day. Bledsoe rebukes the narrator, saying that he should have shown the white man an idealized version of Black life. He expels the narrator, giving him seven letters of recommendation addressed to the college’s white trustees in New York City, and sends him there in search of a job.

The narrator travels to the bright lights and bustle of 1930s Harlem, where he looks unsuccessfully for work. The letters of recommendation are of no help. At last, the narrator goes to the office of one of his letters’ addressees, a trustee named Mr. Emerson. There he meets Emerson’s son, who opens the letter and tells the narrator that he has been betrayed: the letters from Bledsoe actually portray the narrator as dishonorable and unreliable. The young Emerson helps the narrator to get a low-paying job at the Liberty Paints plant, whose trademark color is “Optic White.” The narrator briefly serves as an assistant to Lucius Brockway, the Black man who makes this white paint, but Brockway suspects him of joining in union activities and turns on him. The two men fight, neglecting the paint-making; consequently, one of the unattended tanks explodes, and the narrator is knocked unconscious.

The narrator wakes in the paint factory’s hospital, having temporarily lost his memory and ability to speak. The white doctors seize the arrival of their unidentified black patient as an opportunity to conduct electric shock experiments. After the narrator recovers his memory and leaves the hospital, he collapses on the street. Some black community members take him to the home of Mary, a kind woman who lets him live with her for free in Harlem and nurtures his sense of Black heritage. One day, the narrator witnesses the eviction of an elderly Black couple from their Harlem apartment. Standing before the crowd of people gathered before the apartment, he gives an impassioned speech against the eviction. Brother Jack overhears his speech and offers him a position as a spokesman for the Brotherhood, a political organization that allegedly works to help the socially oppressed. After initially rejecting the offer, the narrator takes the job in order to pay Mary back for her hospitality. But the Brotherhood demands that the narrator take a new name, break with his past, and move to a new apartment. The narrator is inducted into the Brotherhood at a party at the Chthonian Hotel and is placed in charge of advancing the group’s goals in Harlem.


